In the last module, we already had a look at pseudo classes.
Now I mentioned that you should really just dive in and play around with these to find out if there is
something you need,
we'll also see some of them later in the course,
for example invalid or focus.
There is one special pseudo class into which I want to dive right now though and that's the not pseudo class.
This is an interesting pseudo class because it allows us to basically reverse a certain rule or exclude
a certain selector.
So here for example, in that example you can already see, we would apply a certain style to anything that's
not a paragraph,
so it will exclude the selector you pass between the parentheses. Now important,
some browsers support more complex selectors here but most browsers don't.
You can all see down there, the ability to list more than one selector is experimental
but let's see it in action in our little project here.
How can we use not?
Let's say we want to select any anchor tag that is not active.
Here we got our A active combination,
now let's do the opposite,
let's use our anchor tag,
combine it with not and then add active here.
So this will select any anchor tag which does not have the active class and let's simply give this a color
of blue let's say. If we save this and now reload, we see the second anchor tag is blue and if we inspect it,
we can see it's blue due to that rule,
the first anchor tag on the other hand does not have that rule applied because it clearly doesn't apply
here,
we're excluding exactly that case, any anchor tags which are not having the active class. By the way, it's
important that we don't add a whitespace in here for the same reason you learned earlier in this module,
adding a whitespace would select any elements that are nested in an anchor tag and that do not have
the active class
but here we want to select all anchor tags which directly don't have the active class.
Now this shows how to use not,
it can be really handy in some situations but often, you also can find a positive way of writing such
a rule.
For example here, chances are that you simply want to have blue as a default style for all links,
so you could write it like this and simply overwrite it for active links
and since we have more information here, we don't even need to switch the order,
this will have a higher specificity.
So this set up here, if we save it, will in the end lead to the same style,
the only difference is that technically, this intro link which has the active class now also receives
the blue color style but it gets overwritten by the more specific combination with the active class.
So there is a technical difference,
the result is the same though
and I recommend using this way,
so the positive cases, simply because it's easy to mess up with the not selector,
you can write overly complicated and hard to understand rules
and from a performance perspective, keep in mind that your CSS code has to be parsed and applied.
It's also better because not, as you can imagine, is harder to check than simply going through all
the positive cases from top to bottom.
So use not with caution but there can be situations where it allows you to achieve exactly what you
want it to achieve.